# Advent of Code, or the fear of large numbers

Every year I have a go at [Advent of Code](https://adventofcode.com/) - it's a chance to practice some programming that
I don't get much in my job, and it's fun, and I like the cutesy stories. Each day in December you get a programming
challenge, in two parts; they start off simple like sorting a list or finding pairs, and get progressively harder - the
second week is interesting, the third week is challenging, the last week is ... difficult. I'm getting
[better](https://github.com/simongarton/AdventOfCode) ...

What makes it particularly fun is that - like [Google Code Jam](https://codingcompetitions.withgoogle.com/codejam) - the
first part of each challenge is often relatively straightforward, but the second part often requires some thought -
often making the numbers involved much bigger, which in turn means run-time extends out exponentially. Not only do you
have to (for example) make sure you use longs rather than ints, you often need to use what you figured out in part 1
to come up with a different solution.

## 2022 Day 17: Pyroclastic Flow

[This](https://adventofcode.com/2022/day/17) is a lovely example. The first part is fun enough - you have a series of
"rocks" shaped suspiciously like Tetris pieces, dropping down a very narrow shaft, with gusty winds blowing them left
or right. You have to simulate them falling and drifting, before stacking up one on top of the other; and the first part
requires you to simulate `2022` rocks.

No worries.

Part 2 : simulate `1,000,000,000,000` rocks. Sure, Ok ...

.. wait, what ? That's a large number. My simulation speed gave me an estimate of 11 years to completion.

And that's the genius of this competition. Having built the first part, it's possible to see that you only have a
sequence of five rocks; the shaft is very narrow; and although the winds have a long sequence, it is repeatable, and
thus the system is deterministic.

Which then means that part 2 is a matter of running the simulation until you notice a steady pattern emerging - which
conveniently enough does happen during the first part with 2022 rocks - and then using that pattern to predict what will
happen at any given time interval.

## 2022 Day 19: Not Enough Minerals

[This](https://adventofcode.com/2022/day/17) is an even better example. Like day 17, you get to build an engine, and
then run it through a series of simulations. For day 19, it is deceptively simple. You need to collect geodes, with
geode-collecting robots which you have to build, using other minerals (ore and obsidian) which you collect with other
robots - 4 robots, 4 minerals, and each robot has a cost in 1 or 2 minerals.

You're given a timeframe (24 minutes), a single ore-collecting robot and some blueprints : the blueprints define the
costs of each robot. Building
this was straightforward ... but then it got harder.

Even with the blueprint giving you the costs, there are choices to make : in each of the 24 minutes, which robot should
you try to build next ? Do you concentrate on the simpler robots first, giving you more of the simpler minerals faster;
or do you try and build a geode-collecting robot as early as possible, giving it the maximum time to collect geodes ?

One way to solve this is to build a graph of decisions : starting with your one ore-collecting robot (O) first, you can
choose any of the robots - including clay (C), obsidian (B) or geode (G) - to build next. Thus you now have four options
for your first step in the plan : "O", "C", "B" and "G".

But obsidian-collecting robots need clay, and geode-collecting robots need obsidian. So those are not ideal - we don't
have any of those ores just yet. They might end up doing something later, but for now we could consider deprioritizing
them. Taking the first plan "O" with a second ore-collecting robot, we could add a third ore-collecting, or again a
clay-collecting; so "OO" and "OC" look promising, and again "OB" and "OG" seem less hopeful.

Build up your plans - a plan is a sequence of choices like `OOCCCBOBBCBBGGGBGGGGGGG` - until you hit the 24 minute mark,
and for each plan count up the geodes, remembering the best. Easy.

Wait. Given 4 choices every 24 minutes, that's `281,474,976,710,656` different plans (I think.) Initially, with some
debugging left in, I was running "iterations" - the steps in a plan, 24 steps per plan - at about 250/ms, which gives me
a run time of **856 years**. Uh oh.

### Optimisations and pruning

Optimisations - remove debugging, inline some functions - got it up to 11,500/ms, which will take a mere **18 years**.

Clearly we need to
prune out some branches and remove part of the solution space.

There are quite a few options here : some I came up with, some I gleaned from the
[subreddit](https://www.reddit.com/r/adventofcode/). Spoilers !

- don't create geode-collecting robots on the last step, they won't have time to do anything
- estimate how many geodes you could collect from this step onwards, given the number you have, the number of
  geode-collecting robots you have, and assuming one more every step. If this is less than the best result so far, don't
  bother continuing.
- if you have say 8 clay-collecting robots, and the maximum cost in clay of any robot (only the obsidian-collecting
  robots need clay), there's no point in making more of them - you'll always have enough clay to make the robot.
- if you can make a geode-collecting robot, always do so.

This sped up my code very nicely, and it worked fine on the sample. Wait, no it didn't. The sample has two blueprints
...
why does it have two ?

How AoC works - which is part of why it's so good - is that it always gives you a sample that it works through; the idea
is that if your code works on the sample, it will probably work on part 1. Two blueprints in the sample was unexpected;
and only the first one matched my answer.

Spoilers ! I ended up tinkering with a spreadsheet to see if I could spot what was wrong, and this gave me an important
insight. Not making a robot is a valid choice - if you just wait, your existing robots continue collecting minerals,
*and this may give you enough to make a robot you couldn't make on the previous step.* This expands the solution space
to 5 choices every 24 minutes, that's `59,604,644,775,390,600` or 181,000 years unoptimized, 3,944 years with optimized
code.

(Quick thank you to [Eric Wastl](http://was.tl/) and the team at AoC - giving that second blueprint to reveal this
gotcha - which would have been a nightmare to find in the actual problem. The samples are clearly well thought through.)

### Part 2, just a few more minutes

That gave me a solution to part 1, revealing part 2. Which is very simple - we're reducing the number of blueprints to
test ! But increasing the time to 32 minutes. Even with my optimized code, to explore the solution space for any given
blueprint ... that's **one and a half billion years**.

Luckily, pruning branches brought this down to a manageable number; and I solved the 3 blueprints for part 2 in 54
minutes.

There are solutions on the [subreddit](https://www.reddit.com/r/adventofcode/comments/zpihwi/2022_day_19_solutions/)
in far less lines of code, giving answers in seconds. Yeah, whatever.

### Overall stats for part 2

```
1 : best is 58 geodes with OOCCCBOBBCBBGGGBGGGGGGG--; done 253,585,639 iterations, 2,137,441,915 robots, 185,126,449 plans evaluated, 58 plans completed, 8,798,710,823 harvested; taken 20.81 seconds @ rate 12188.69/ms.
2 : best is 10 geodes with OOCCCCCCCCBCBCBCBCBGCBBG----; done 34,085,734,356 iterations, 335,040,307,246 robots, 22,323,936,001 plans evaluated, 10 plans completed, 2,306,100,104,855 harvested; taken 2886.72 seconds @ rate 11807.78/ms.
3 : best is 23 geodes with OOCCCCCCCBCCBCBCGBBGBGG-G--; done 5,110,744,178 iterations, 48,108,759,584 robots, 3,546,651,104 plans evaluated, 23 plans completed, 290,941,598,442 harvested; taken 425.32 seconds @ rate 12016.23/ms.
```

- Plans evaluated : 26,055,713,554
- Plans completed : 91 (same as geodes - I don't complete plans if they're not going to beat the previous one.)
- Plan iterations / steps : 39,450,064,173
- Robots made : 385,286,508,745
- Minerals harvested : 2,605,840,414,120
- Total time : 54 minutes







